We have gathered together once again to get some time and savor our opportunity to connect
with and practice, and also reflect on the Dudjom Tersar Ngondro, and also the Buddha
Dharma in general. So we'll begin again. As we always do, is to reconnect to our home
base, which is principally about our motivation. What is my mind doing? What's my heart doing?
So those three key points that we always come back to, that Venerable Kambaramichas and
all these lineage masters just always come back to, is one, awaken the mind aimed towards
liberation. We do this by renouncing the causes of suffering. So this renunciation mind, our
joy and appreciation, so bring up this buoyant, bright, joy and appreciation for this precious
opportunity we have to absorb even further and integrate the Dharma with our lives every
breath, so this joyful kind of approach. And then all beings, like our parent sentient
beings, who've cared for us so much for so long, then try to bring them to mind that
part of the motivation is that we're going to study and practice the Buddha Dharma so
that we can be of immediate, direct, effective benefit to each and every single sentient
being so they can be happy, and be free from the causes of suffering and suffering itself,
and eventually, hopefully very soon, attain liberation, enlightenment. And then thirdly,
this is a Vajrayana or Tibetan Buddhist practice, then we reawaken or reignite our pure perception
or that devotion, the closeness we have to the lineage, to our own true nature, to the
true nature of all beings. So we awaken, turn on this pure perception, kind of be and see
that form, sound, space, that all these experiences we have, like right now, this very moment,
is essentially and completely pure. It is unstained, it is perfect, and just the very
nature of this experience now and all experience, outer inner, the world, and all the beings
in it are essentially pure. So we kind of turn on these three qualities of joy and appreciation
and bodhicitta and pure perception.
Thank you. So it's such a sacred opportunity to have, to reflect on the Dharma and today,
the topic kind of going to explore just a little bit, called bodhicitta, leaning into
the future beyond this life. So bodhicitta, leaning into the future beyond this life.
So the principal topics here, in terms of the nandro, is this bodhicitta and also impermanence.
The great master, Auryasya Yune, is like a pillar of the semde lineage, the mind class.
In zogchen, these are the two foundations of authentic zogchen practice, bodhicitta,
heartfelt bodhicitta, and also this very visceral lived experience of impermanence. This
opportunity
is constantly leaving us, it's dissolving, it's like such a special rare time we have
to practice and study the Dharma. So if we really ignite these two in our lives, impermanence
and bodhicitta, it lines everything up, we kind of tune into the nature so that we become
receptive of the nature, we can fully express the nature, our own nature. These are essential
as Vajrayana practitioners and zogchen practitioners, and that means practitioners of the dudjim
tersar nandro. So today, to explore this topic a little bit, which we won't do very long,
it will be kind of a little condensed, I'm largely just going to rely on the precious
sacred Vajra words of some of the masters. They were so fortunate to have close to us
that their words still exist, some of them still alive. So highlighting this, the fact
of bodhicitta, and there's only so much time we have to really mingle our minds with bodhicitta.
And so what does that mean in the context of this life? It's just a very, the window
is always closing more and more, this life. So kind of go jump right into the words of
some of these great masters. And I thought to kind of the big frame is for today, there's
37 practices of the bodhisattvas. By the great master, Nautrul Tomai Zangpo, the 37 practices
of the bodhisattvas in stanza four, the fourth practice, is that long associated companions
will part from each other. Wealth and possessions obtained with effort will be left behind.
Consciousness, the guest will cast aside the guest house of the body. Letting go of this
life is the bodhisattva's practice. So then the second big frame is called parting from
the four attachments. And this was a teaching that was said to be directly taught by Manjushri
to Sanchinkunga Ninkpo, parting from the four attachments. If you are attached to this life,
you're not a true spiritual practitioner. If you're attached to samsara, you have no renunciation.
If you're attached to your own self-interest, you have no bodhicitta. If there is grasping,
you do not have the view. I'll repeat these. If you're attached to this life, you're not
a true spiritual practitioner. If you're attached to samsara, you have no renunciation. If you're
attached to your own self-interest, you have no bodhicitta. If there is grasping, you do
not have the view. So these are the general frames for kind of this contemplation before
we do the dujum tursar andra practice. And so it's good to highlight specifically with
these parting from the four attachments, the second, third, and fourth are the same three
points that we try to bring up at the beginning of every time we study and practice renunciation.
Bodhicitta and pure perception. And this pure perception is based on the middle wave and
yamaka view. And then in addition, it includes pure relative truth, which we just very casually
easily call pure perception. So great equality with pure relative truth. This is called pure
perception. So these three points, even in these four parting from the four attachments,
they're highlighting three of the points we really try to activate every time we turn
our minds toward the dharma, renunciation, bodhicitta, pure perception. These are so
essential, which just means it'll only be good for us to keep coming back to them again
and again and again, because that's what we have to do in our practice anyway. So they'll
never go wrong. They'll always be reliable ways to orient our study and our practice.
So if we're kind of have an afternoon, we don't know what to do, reflect on or practice
renunciation, bodhicitta, pure perception, or just mingle it with whatever we happen
to be doing. Well, then we'll have three of these will apart it from three of the big
four attachments, at least in that time where we're really activating that. And then the
first one, if you're attached to this life, you're not a true spiritual practitioner.
This is kind of a strong topic. It's a strong statement, as well as the 37, the fourth practice
of the bodhisattva. Letting go of this life is the bodhisattva's practice. Sometimes it
seems good to highlight the impermanent nature of our opportunity now. That it's just, you
know, we only have so long. And then what comes after we pass, we die, you know, we'll see.
But while the opportunities in our hands, like we really do have so much on our own
side to practice the Dharma and to study to refine our habits. I thought a big point of
this is part of the full Dharma path isn't just to know that they're suffering. That's
the first noble truth. There is suffering, suffering of suffering, suffering of change,
suffering of conditioned existence. We have to clearly hold that in mind. Then in addition,
we have to look, what's the cause of suffering? Is there a way to completely remove the cause
of suffering? And if there is, what's the path of doing that? We shouldn't stop at the
first noble truth, not just their suffering. Because if we only go that far and we don't
work on the causes of suffering and removing them, then this, it basically kind of ruins
all of our fun. It's just, we're going to see suffering everywhere. Pervasive suffering
of conditioned existence. We can't stop there as Dharma practitioners. We have to actually
look at the cause, which the Buddha taught was our own kleshas, our own afflictive emotions,
our own grasping and the activities we do based on that grasping. And we have to really try
to uproot them and not feed them so much until they're really totally gone. This is what
it means to be a Dharma practitioner and this is completely an inside job. The cause of suffering
is my own afflictive emotions and the activities I do based on them. It's my own grasping and
the activities I do with grasping mind. It's just usually called duality mind. This has
to be uprooted. That's the path. And then how do we uproot this? Bodhicitta. There's
two bodhicittas we've all heard, relative and absolute bodhicitta. So I'll jump to Venerable
Kempa Ramache's and Illuminating the Path, their nundra book on the Dujum Tersar nundra,
which we've referred to quite a lot for these times. I'm just jumping to page 93. When
Buddha Shakyamuni was alive, there was a famous king named Prasanajet who ruled much of northern
India from his capital in Shrivasti. He's very devoted to the Buddha but did not have
a lot of time to practice because of his worldly duties. His heart was with the Buddha but
he couldn't connect deeply with the Dharma. This worried him, so one day he asked the Buddha
what to do. The Buddha said, "If you can do only one practice, you will be applying
yourself all the time." "What would that be?" asked the king. "It is generating bodhicitta,"
said the Buddha. "Bring bodhicitta into each of your daily activities, whether you are
standing, walking, sitting, or sleeping. While you are governing the kingdom or whatever
you are doing, if you keep bodhicitta in your heart, it will transform all your actions
into the practice of Dharma." So not only do we know this life is fleeting and we're
not really so sure what's next, we do know what we need to do to uproot the cause of
suffering, is activate bodhicitta. Kind of simply put, sometimes it's good to just hit
the essentials. Oh, the second one of this, which is jumping two pages ahead. I almost
forgot, I was a little worried to say it, but then, we always, this book we've referred
to so much in this. Page 96, Venerable Kambhramache's. Patra Rambhache said that without bodhicitta
firmly established in your heart, even if you have memorized the Dzogchen Tantras and
can quote all the Mahamudra texts, you're merely paying lip service to the Dharma. He
said that no matter how vast your view is, without bodhicitta, whatever you say is the
doctrine of demons. He felt strongly about this, saying that people who talk about their
experiences of bliss and emptiness and Vajrayana practice without having bodhicitta as a foundation
should have their mouths stuffed with the garbage of nine cities. Kind of strong. That's
Patra Rambhache, the great master Patra Rambhache, words of my perfect teacher. This is just
to say, it's all about bodhicitta, and if we're not really taking that to heart, which
I don't all the time, then watch out, and like wasting my time. I'm wasting my precious
opportunity to actually completely uproot the causes of my own suffering so I can really
help other beings. So watch out, Rakpa. Garbage of nine cities. Secondly, these are so many
gems here. The heart treasure of the enlightened ones by his Holiness Dzogchen Tantra Rambhache.
This is such a sacred text. Page 32. In this decadent age, let's see here. One second.
Page 33. So it's in the chapter, the shortcomings of our decadent age. If you follow the example
of most people in this decadent age, you will end up being just like them, an expert fraud.
You will waste your life chasing after the unattainable. You will be like children who
are so busy playing that they're indifferent to hunger and cold and don't notice the day
passing until it gets dark and they suddenly remember their mother and start crying. If
you genuinely want to help beings, you must first perfect yourself. If you make a lot
of ambitious plans, doing business, collecting disciples, and setting yourself up as a teacher,
you will end up like a spider caught in its own web. Spending your life spinning such
webs, you won't notice how fast time is passing until you suddenly realize that death is at
hand. You will have used all your energy and gone through all sorts of hardships, but these
hardships, like the trials of spiritual practice, will not have helped you in the least to improve
yourself. The Holy Kadampa teachers used to practice in a very humble way, completely
disregarding comfort and entertainment. And our teacher, Buddha Shakimuni, left the pleasures
of his palace behind and practiced austerities for six years. Since we are his followers,
should not we too relinquish all worldly concerns, forget the endless distractions of our friends
and relatives, and wholeheartedly follow the instructions of a genuine teacher?
What is the good of getting involved in samsara issues? Everything in samsara undergoes constant
upheaval. Millionaires become beggars, and beggars become millionaires. Whatever happens,
people are never content. If they make a million, they want to make two. If they make two million,
they want to make three. How will you ever be satisfied like that? There is only one
thing of which you should never feel you have had enough. Your dharma practice. Be like
a hungry yak who, as he grazes, is always looking ahead to see where more grass can
be found. If you practice in this way, you won't be disappointed. If you actually tried
to achieve everything you want for this life, there would never be enough time. It is said
all those plans are like children's games. If we put them into action, they will never
be finished. But if we just drop them, they are all finished at once.
So this is related with renunciation mind. It is good to emphasize too that even a little
bit of turning towards these teachings is a significant adjustment. It is really beneficial.
We don't have to achieve enlightenment all at once. It is never how that happens. Little
by little. So we don't have to hold some giant end goal, and if we are not there tomorrow,
then we get upset. Every little step is so significant. So we should really celebrate
and rejoice in all the good things we can do to orient our minds towards the dharma,
and to be kind to others, and generate bodhicitta even for a moment. I am going to end on an
inspiring note, but before, I am going to kind of pull out the rug a little more, okay?
All right, this is his only saki-trisen, the forty-first saki-trisen. Freeing the heart
and mind. Introduction to the Buddhist Path, page eighty-six. This is on parting from the
four attachments. This specific book, most of it is on parting from the four attachments.
So this first line of the parting from four attachments again, "If you have attachment
to this life, you are not a religious person." And we said before, "Not a spiritual practitioner."
Then his onlyness goes on to say, "The general contents of this first line are common to
Hinayana, Mahayana, and Vajrayana traditions. The first line directly describes the right
way and the wrong way to practice dharma. Right dharma practice, pure dharma practice,
is not attached to this life. Practicing dharma with attachment to this life is not real dharma.
It is still just worldly activity. Just like a mirage that appears to be water but does
not quench thirst, such activity is apparently dharma but does not liberate you from the
sufferings of samsara. If you practice dharma with attachment to this life, any practice
that you do, whether it is moral conduct, study, contemplation, or meditation, will
not even result in the accomplishment of prosperity in this life. If the goal of dharma practice
is to gain fame, disciples, or wealth, the practice will become the seed of the lower
realms and samsara instead of becoming the seed of liberation and enlightenment. It is
not actual dharma practice. The great Indian master Vasubandhu said, "Upon a base of sound
moral conduct, hear, contemplate, and thoroughly apply yourself to meditation." To be pure
dharma, whatever practice you do should not be mixed with attachment to this life. This
is because this life is very transient. Very few people live longer than 100 years. This
life is also without essence. Everything is impermanent and is not really worthy of attachment.
The goals of the dharma path have many different levels. To say nothing of liberation or
enlightenment,
we should, at minimum, practice for a purpose beyond this life. In other words, at least
for the benefit of our next life. The first line of the teaching, "If you have attachment
to this life, you are not a religious person," directly explains the right and wrong ways
to practice dharma. Indirectly, it points to the difficulty of obtaining a precious
human birth endowed with the 18 prerequisites. It also, because of impermanence, indicates
the importance of diligently practicing dharma without any delay. Not only humans, but every
sentient being possesses Buddha nature. The true nature of every sentient being's mind
is unstained by obscurations. Any sentient being that meets with the right methods has
the opportunity to become a fully enlightened Buddha. However, among the six types of sentient
beings, human beings have the best chance to accomplish Buddhahood. Therefore, this human
life, in particular, when endowed with 18 prerequisites, is very precious and difficult
to find. So I think what it does actually is really trying to focus not just on this
life, the immediate benefit of dharma, but at least next life, and then on and on and
on into the future, is it actually makes us use our time right now really well. If we
really take a long-term and vast view, thinking about all beings, for as long as it takes,
which is what bodhicitta does, then it means it'll immediately make us want to really seize
the opportunity of right now, which doesn't mean give up all the things we love and shave
our heads and go never talk to anyone again. It means really actively activate bodhicitta
right now and then do all the things of our daily lives. If being a monastic is more like
what suits your mind to really bring up bodhicitta, then do that. Or if having kids does that,
or if being in a cave does that, or if just working at your job does that, whatever it
is, just like the Buddha taught to King Prasannajit, bodhicitta is the main practice and everything
becomes dharma practice if we bring up bodhicitta. So if we really think, if we're really concerned
about the future, it really means bring up bodhicitta now and not just so that I'll be
free of suffering, but all beings will be free of suffering and the causes of suffering.
And so then here we get more into the strict definition of bodhicitta, because there's
relative bodhicitta and absolute bodhicitta. And I'm just really wanting to like, resound
the words of these noble beings, because we have these noble beings are here and their
words are here. So I've kind of thought to just use this time mainly to just recite what,
you know, repeat their words, repeat the words of the Buddha, this will never go wrong. So
here, if we're looking more at the absolute nature of bodhicitta, because it's not just
being nice, it's actually about removing all the causes of suffering for all beings. So
then jump to this book, not for happiness, which is another way to say it's not just
about being nice. A guide to the so called preliminary practices. This is also another
commentary on Dijam Tersar Nandro. By jumping, sorry, Zogsar Jamin Kensei Rinpoche. I'm jumping
here to page 114, where he starts discussing bodhicitta and kind of highlighting more the
absolute nature of bodhicitta. Until we've established a complete understanding of bodhicitta,
we will continue to make the mistake of imagining that pain truly exists. As a result, we will
almost certainly become the victims of our own compassion. And without fully appreciating
non-duality, our every activity will lead to disappointment. For example, as a therapist,
how far are you prepared to go to help an alcoholic or a drug addict? Imagine that one
of your clients is certain to be reborn a drug addict for the next 5000 lifetimes. As
a bodhisattva, your determination to help her should be so great that you aspire to
be reborn at the right time and in the right place during every one of those lifetimes,
so you can continue her treatment. Fast forward to the 5000th lifetime. Your client has been
reborn in a lonely, God forsaken country, and all you have to do to ensure that she
will never again be reborn as an addict is hang out with her for half a day. This means
that you must also be reborn in that wretched place and that the entire focus of your life
will be to get you to the right place at the right time to spend those few hours with your
client. To do this, you will need what the teachings describe as strength or determination,
courage and commitment, right? And you will only find this strength once you come to realize
the illusory nature of all phenomena. In other words, emptiness. So how do you develop the
remarkable strength of compassion you need to be able to behave so selflessly? How do
you develop the determination never to give up? Where do you find the confidence and tenacity
to keep trying? Every one of these qualities springs from the realization that the drug
addict, her problem, that she can be healed, and even the idea that she needs healing are
all merely the products of your own mind. None of it truly exists outside the mind. And having
realized this truth, you can go on to develop the strong and genuine compassion that is
Borichitta. So this is highlighting the importance of absolute Borichitta, or impermanence or
shunyata, that it's all course is loving kindness and compassion, but it's also wisdom or prajna.
Borichitta always has wisdom and compassion, not just compassion. And without kind of really
seeing the illusory nature of samsara, of suffering, will always be in duality mind.
And then we won't really fully uproot these causes of suffering. So I'm not saying I can
do this at all. I'm just saying it's really clear in the teachings that Borichitta really
has this relative and absolute side as well. And the absolute side is this is all my mind.
And if we go closer, my mind is pure. My mind is totally flexible. And all these powers
and capacities are just, they're fundamentally a part of every single moment of my experience.
And I just have to connect to them and let them do what they do. In other words, be natural.
So this Borichitta resolve, just to say, I mean, there's a lot of ways to unpack impermanence
in Borichitta. I thought to pick out a few strong statements, because sometimes we can
just think, oh, impermanence, of course. Oh, Borichitta, of course. But when we really
look at the teachings and what we're asked to do to how to really ignite this in our experience,
and that we're looking out, there's so much suffering. And inside, there's so much kind
of movement all the time that really try to bring to home, what is this impermanence?
What is Borichitta? Why is it such an elixir that really solves all the problems? How does
it lead us to non-duality or beyond the limitations of our duality mind? That's a really real
question for practitioners, because we're not going to stop samsara from being samsara.
It's going to always keep being samsara. But if we see more clearly, then the opportunity
for Borichitta to shine on really happens. And then we can really integrate all of our
activities with dharma. And that becomes not just a fairy tale or a nice thing to say,
but actually a lived experience, that all these noble beings, we have the great fortune
to be around. They're living embodiments that that is possible. That truth is not some fairy
tale. It's not some mythical thing. It didn't just happen a long time ago. They're living
embodiments of the dharma right now. And so to end on on a high note, I want to talk really
just read this Garland of views, the eight great bodhisattvas. This is such an inspiring
book. This is by Mipham Rinpoche, where he goes over each of the eight bodhisattvas and
pulls out sutra teachings about their activities. And it really if you want some really so powerful
impactful bedtime stories, and just things to connect with all these life stories of
this noble eight bodhisattvas so strong. They're so inspiring what they did and what they're
doing. So to end on a high note, not just be like, Oh, this lie, I think of this life
all the time. So I'm not a true spiritual practitioner. Okay, I think of that like that
all the time. But then we have to look at the power of Borichitta. What are we talking
about? When how does it remove all the causes of suffering? We should really highlight the
benefit of enlightenment, the benefit of the dharma, not just the downside of samsara,
but also the goodness of seizing the opportunity. So here I go to the chapter on Avalokiteshvara,
who is also the source of the 37 practices of bodhisattva. I mean, really this. So this
goes into the chapter of Avalokiteshvara, the all seeing one, page 169. One could count
the number of drops of water in an ocean by removing it drop by drop with the tip of a
sorry, with the tip of a hair. If it rained heavily and continuously day and night for
a year or even 13 months, one could still count the number of raindrops fallen in that
period. One could not, however, measure the aggregate of merit accumulated by a single
recitation of the six syllables. If all the men, women, boys and girls in the four continents
became bodhisattvas on the seventh level, the aggregate of all their merit would still
be greatly exceeded by the aggregate of merit gained by a single recitation of the six syllables.
Even if millions of tatagatas were to describe it for an entire deva-kalpa, they could not
enumerate the aggregate of merit gained by a single recitation of the six syllable awareness
mantra, "Omani Pemehung." What need is there to say that I, a single tatagata, abiding
in this world and unable to do so? "Omani Pemehung." "Omani Pemehung." "Omani Pemehung."
"Omani Pemehung." The power of our Dharma practice is just immeasurable. Doing the
dudrum tarsar and nundra together, turning our minds toward the Dharma when it's such
a decadent age that's trying to turn our minds away from the Dharma all the time, just moving
a little bit towards bodhicitta, highlighting bodhicitta once. "Omani Pemehung." Just saying
it once, just longing for Dharma, wishing one day we could go on retreat, let alone having
a daily practice, coming together into some video, disembodied, two-screen live webcast
thing. We're doing that and we keep doing it. And the benefit is so significant. We
should really highlight that. Thank you for showing up. "Omani Pemehung." "Omani Pemehung."
May we keep showing up together forever and ever for the benefit of all beings and really
seize the opportunity. I really appreciate it. Thank you. And all this is a reminder
for my own mind because I'm just so burdened with samsaric activity, samsara and all the
causes and afflictive and everything. But I know, ooh, time's short. I know that every
now and then I remember. And bodhicitta, every now and then I remember, that's the whole
point of this. Bodhicitta, right? So if I can bring those up in my own mind, "Oh, I have
a minute. I have a minute to do the mani mantra. "Omani Pemehung, omani Pemehung, omani Pemehung."
That is a life that's worth living. And that minute is so vastly significant. And we should
not forget how significant even a moment of turning our mind towards the Dharma is. So
really thank you all for showing up. So glad to be in this together with you all. Yay.
May we do it forever. Thank you.